workshop/00-prerequisites.md, before:

[home](README.md)
# Prerequisites

## 1. IBM Cloud Services

We will use the following IBM Cloud Services in this hands-on workshop:

* [IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/containers?topic=containers-getting-started#getting-started) with a custom **Istio** installation
* [IBM Cloud Container Registry Service](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#getting-started)

![cns-basic-setup-01](images/cns-basic-setup-01.png)

## 2. Tools on your laptop

In order to complete the workshop, you will need the following tools installed on your laptop:

- IDE or Editor: [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), for example 
- [git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git) 
- [curl](https://curl.haxx.se/download.html)
- [IBM Cloud CLI](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/home/tools)
  [IBM Cloud CLI releases](https://github.com/IBM-Cloud/ibm-cloud-cli-release/releases)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/v17.12/install/)
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)


### 2.1 Options for Windows

For Windows, you will need access to a Unix shell because you will execute predefined bash scripts and other CLI commands. 

You have different options:

1. [Use a workshop Docker image for Window 10](00-prerequisites-windows-10.md)
    
    We tested this option on a Windows 10 machine and documented it.

2. [Windows Subsystem for Linux Installation Guide for Windows 10](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10)

3. IBM Docker image

    There is a Docker image provided by IBM that contains most of the CLI tools needed
    
    * [Using IBM Cloud Developer Tools from a Docker Container](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cli?topic=cloud-cli-using-idt-from-docker). 
    
    _Note:_ You need to share the downloaded GitHub repo on your Windows filesystem with the running Docker image.

4. Virtual Box

    You can also use [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org) or [Hyper-V](https://docs.microsoft.com/de-de/virtualization/hyper-v-on-windows/about/) to create an [Ubuntu](https://www.osboxes.org/ubuntu/) VM and run the workshop directly in the VM in a Linux environment.

## 3. Verfiy the major prerequisites on your machine

To verfiy the major prerequisites on your machine, you can execute following bash script.

_Note:_ If you use the **workshop Docker image for Windows** described above, you don't need to follow these steps. Everything is in place already.

```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/IBM/cloud-native-starter.git
$ cd cloud-native-starter
$ chmod u+x iks-scripts/*.sh
$ chmod u+x scripts/*.sh
$ ./iks-scripts/check-prerequisites.sh
```

## 4. Setup IBM Cloud Kubernetes cluster<a name="home"></a>

By default, deployment is set in Dallas, USA (us-south). 

1. [Register for IBM Cloud](#part-SETUP-00)
2. [Insert promo code](#part-SETUP-01)
3. [Setup the IBM Cloud CLI](#part-SETUP-02)
4. [Get IBM platform key](#part-SETUP-08)
   4.1 [Customize the IBM Cloud Registry name](#part-SETUP-08-1)
5. [Setup the IBM Cloud Kubernetes CLI](#part-SETUP-03)
6. [Create a IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service and add Istio](#part-SETUP-04)
7. [Access the Kubernetes cluster manually (optional)](#part-SETUP-05)
8. [Access the IBM Cloud Container Registry manually (optional)](#part-SETUP-06)

_Note:_ If you already have a lite cluster in Dallas, some of these scripts will not work, because only **one** lite cluster is allowed per account.

---

### 4.1 Register for IBM Cloud <a name="part-SETUP-00"></a>

1. Open a browser window and navigate to the IBM Cloud [Registration page](https://ibm.biz/Bd2JHx).

![image](images/registration.png)

2. Fill in the registration form and follow the link in the **confirmation email** to confirm your account once it arrives.

![Validation email](images/email.png)

3. [Login into IBM Cloud](https://ibm.biz/Bd2JHx) using your account credentials.

_Note:_ By default, all new IBM Cloud accounts are set to a [lite version](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/pricing).

The lite account provides free access to a subset of IBM Cloud resources. Lite accounts **do not need a credit-card** to sign up and they **do not expire** after a certain period of time. 
In order to create a free Kubernetes cluster, you need a **promo** or **feature code**.

---

### 4.2 Insert promo code <a name="part-SETUP-01"></a>
[<home>](#home)

In order to execute the workshop easily, we provide **promotional codes** to create free Kubernetes clusters, so no credit card details are required.
To apply the promotional code to your [Cloud Account](https://cloud.ibm.com/account), navigate to your "`Account settings`" and then to ("`Manage`" -> "`Account`").
Enter your unique Feature (Promo) Code to upgrade your lite account.

_Note:_ Free clusters expire after one month.

---

### 4.3 Setup the IBM Cloud CLI <a name="part-SETUP-02"></a>
[<home>](#home)

_Note:_ If you use the **workshop Docker image for Windows** described above, you don't need to follow these steps. Everything is in place already.

Follow the steps listed under the [Install from shell](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cli/reference/bluemix_cli?topic=cloud-cli-install-ibmcloud-cli#shell_install) section to download and install the IBM Cloud CLI.

- MacOS: `curl -fsSL https://clis.ng.bluemix.net/install/osx | sh`
- Linux: `curl -fsSL https://clis.ng.bluemix.net/install/linux | sh`
- Windows (Powershell): `iex(New-Object Net.WebClient).DownloadString('https://clis.ng.bluemix.net/install/powershell')`

[Documentation install CLI](images/docs.gif)

---

### 4.4 Get an IBM platform key <a name="part-SETUP-08"></a>

We will need an IBM platform key to use the bash script automation later. 

1. Log in to IBM Cloud using the **"us-south"** Region. Include the --sso option if using a federated ID.

```sh
$ ibmcloud login -a https://cloud.ibm.com -r us-south -g default
```

_Note:_ If this statement does not work, please change **d**efault to **D**efault

2. Create an IBM platform for your API key and name it (**cloud-native-starter-key**, for example) and provide a filename  (**cloud-native-starter-key.json**, for example).

```sh
$ ibmcloud iam api-key-create cloud-native-starter-key \
  -d "This is the cloud-native-starter key to access the IBM Platform" \
  --file cloud-native-starter-key.json
$ cat cloud-native-starter-key.json
```

Sample **json** output. 
Copy the ```"apikey": "KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx"```from the json output.

```sh
{
	"name": "cloud-native-starter-key",
	"description": "This is the cloud-native-starter key to access the IBM Platform",
	"apikey": "KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx",
	"createdAt": "2019-06-05T06:33+0000",
	"locked": false,
	"uuid": "ApiKey-b96e7355-d1f5-477c-be60-302b20xxxxx"
}
```

_Optional:_ We can verify the key in IBM Cloud, as you can see in the image below:

![ibm-cloud-key](images/ibm-cloud-key.png)


3. Create a copy of the **template.local.env** and paste the file into the same folder. Rename the new file to **local.env**. Then insert the platform key, which we created before, into the **local.env** file as the value for the ```IBMCLOUD_API_KEY``` variable, which we can see in step 4.

_Note:_ If you use the **custom Docker image**, you don't need to follow these steps.

```sh
$ cp template.local.env local.env
$ cat local.env
```

1. Verify the entries in the `local.env` file.

2. Open file **local.env** in a editor.

_Note:_ If you use the **custom Docker image**, open the file with the nano editor. ```nano local.env```

We see the file has preset values for regions, cluster name, and image registry namespace in local.env. You can adjust them to your needs.

3. Insert the copied ```"apikey":"KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx"```from the json output to ```IBMCLOUD_API_KEY=KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx``` and save the file.

### 4.4.1 Customize the IBM Cloud Registry name <a name="part-SETUP-08-1"></a>

1. Edit the `local.env` file.

2. Change the ```REGISTRY_NAMESPACE=cloud-native``` to ```cloud-native-yourname```

_Note:_ `yourname` must be maximum 5 charters. Changing the name is necessary, because namespaces are required to be **unique** across the entire **region** that the **specific registry** is located in, not just ***unique to your account**. This is mentioned in the following [public documentation](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#gs_registry_namespace_add).

**Example** local.env:

```sh
IBMCLOUD_API_KEY=KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx
IBM_CLOUD_REGION=us-south
CLUSTER_NAME=cloud-native
REGISTRY_NAMESPACE=cloud-native-yourname
IBM_CLOUD_CF_API=https://api.ng.bluemix.net
IBM_CLOUD_CF_ORG=
IBM_CLOUD_CF_SPACE=dev
AUTHORS_DB=local
CLOUDANT_URL=

```
---

### 4.5 Setup the IBM Cloud Kubernetes CLI <a name="part-SETUP-03"></a>
[<home>](#home)

_Note:_ If you use the **workshop Docker image for Windows** described above, you don't need to follow these steps. Everything is in place already.

Let's log in to the IBM Cloud CLI tool: `ibmcloud login`.
If you are an IBMer, include the `--sso` flag: `ibmcloud login --sso`.

1. Install the IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service plug-ins:

```sh
$ ibmcloud plugin install container-service
$ ibmcloud plugin install container-registry
```

To verify that the plug-in is installed properly, run `ibmcloud plugin list`.
The Container Service plug-in is displayed in the results as `container-service/kubernetes-service`.

2. Initialize the Container Service plug-in and point the endpoint to your region with the `ks` sub command:

```sh
$ ibmcloud ks region-set us-south
```

Note: all subsequent CLI commands will operate in that region.

---

### 4.6 Create a IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service and add ISTIO<a name="part-SETUP-04"></a>
[<home>](#home)

For the following steps we use bash scripts from the github project.

---

#### 4.6.1 Automated creation of a Cluster with Istio for the workshop

* **create cluster**

1. Use the following bash script to create a free Kubernetes Cluster on IBM Cloud:

```sh
$ ./iks-scripts/create-iks-cluster.sh
```

_Note:_ Creating a cluster can take up to **20 minutes**.
You can verify the cluster in the IBM Cloud, as we see in the image below:

![ibm-cloud-cluster](images/ibm-cloud-cluster.png)

* **Adding Istio**

The IBM Kubernetes Service has an option to install a managed Istio mesh into a Kubernetes cluster. Unfortunately, the Lite Kubernetes Cluster we created in the previous step does not meet the hardware requirements for a managed Istio. Hence, we manually install an Istio demo or evaluation version.

These are the instructions to install Istio. For this workshop we are using **Istio 1.1.5**.

_Note:_ Ensure you are logged on to IBM Cloud in your terminal session.
        ```sh
        $ ibmcloud login -a https://cloud.ibm.com -r us-south -g default
        ```
        _Note:_ If this statement does not work, please change **d**efault to **D**efault

1. First, let's check if the cluster is available:

    ```sh
    $ ./iks-scripts/cluster-get-config.sh
    ```
    If the cluster isn't ready, the script will tell you. Just wait a few more minutes and then try again.

    _Note:_ You **must** run this command to check that the cluster completed provisioning, it **must** report that the cluster is **ready for Istio installation**! This command also retrieves the cluster configuration, which is needed in other scripts. This configuration can only be retrieved from clusters in a ready state.

2. List the available clusters: ```ibmcloud ks clusters```. This command should now show the cluster which is being created.


3. Download the configuration file and certificates for the cluster using the ```cluster-config``` command:

    ```sh
    $ ibmcloud ks cluster-config <cluster-name>
    ```

4. Copy and paste the **output** from the command in the previous step to set the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable and configure the CLI to run `kubectl` commands against the cluster:

    ```sh
    $ export KUBECONFIG=/<home>/.bluemix/plugins/container-service/clusters/mycluster/kube-config-<region>-<cluster-name>.yml
    ```


5. Download Istio 1.1.5 directly from github into the **workshop** directory:

    ```sh
    cd workshop
    curl -L https://git.io/getLatestIstio | ISTIO_VERSION=1.1.5 sh -
    ```

    _Note:_ Please be aware that this does **not** work on Windows.
    Windows users can download [istio-1.1.5-win.zip](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.1.5) here.
    Unpack the ZIP file into the workshop directory and add the path to ```istio-1.1.5/bin``` your Windows **PATH**.

6. Add `istioctl` to the PATH environment variable, e.g copy and paste in your shell and/or `~/.profile`:

    ```sh
    export PATH=$PWD/istio-1.1.5/bin:$PATH
    ```

7. Navigate to the extracted directory: 

    ```sh
    cd istio-1.1.5
    ```

8. Install Istio:

    ```sh
    $ for i in install/kubernetes/helm/istio-init/files/crd*yaml; do kubectl apply -f $i; done
    ```
    
    a. Wait a few seconds before issuing the next command:

    ```sh
    $ kubectl apply -f install/kubernetes/istio-demo.yaml
    ```

    b. Check that all pods are **running** or **completed** before continuing.

    ```sh
    $ kubectl get pod -n istio-system
    ```

    c. Enable automatic sidecar injection:

    ```sh
    $ kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled
    ```

    d. Once completed, the Kiali dashboard can be accessed with this command:

    ```sh
    $ kubectl -n istio-system port-forward $(kubectl -n istio-system get pod -l app=kiali -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}') 20001:20001
    ```
    e. Then open http://localhost:20001/kiali in your browser, log in with the following credentials Username: admin, Password: admin

    ![Kiali installation](images/istio-installation-02.png)

    In the following image we can see Istio installed on the Kubernetes cluster. We also notice the **Istio Ingress gateway** and the **Istio-System** namespace, which we will use later.
    
    ![Istio installation](images/istio-installation-01.png)

Customize the IBM Cloud Registry Configure

1. Ensure you are are in the project directory and then execute the script.

```sh
$ cd ../..
$ pwd
$ ./iks-scripts/create-registry.sh
```

Sample output:

```sh
2019-06-05 09:06:40 Creating a Namespace in IBM Cloud Container Registry
2019-06-05 09:06:40 Logging into IBM Cloud
2019-06-05 09:06:48 Creating Namespace cloud-native
2019-06-05 09:07:03 Namespace in IBM Cloud Container Registry created
```

If you get to following output in the ```./iks-scripts/create-registry.log``` logfile ```The requested namespace is already in use```.

```sh
OK
Adding namespace 'cloud-native'...

FAILED
The requested namespace is already in use in registry 'us.icr.io'.
Choose a different namespace.
```

Namespaces are required to be unique across the entire region that the specific registry is located in, not just unique on each account. This is mentioned in the following [public documentation](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#gs_registry_namespace_add). 

Change the registry name in the ```local.env``` file, for example to ```REGISTRY_NAMESPACE=cloud-native-YOUR_NAME```.

```sh
IBM_CLOUD_REGION=us-south
IBM_CLOUD_CLUSTER_REGION=us-south
CLUSTER_NAME=cloud-native
REGISTRY_NAMESPACE=cloud-native-YOUR_NAME
```

_Optional:_ You can find the created namespace here (https://cloud.ibm.com/kubernetes/registry/main/start):

![ibm-cloud-registry](images/ibm-cloud-registry.png)

---

#### 4.6.2  Manual creation of a Cluster (optional)

You can create an IBM Cloud Kubernetes cluster (lite ) using the [IBM Cloud console](https://cloud.ibm.com/containers-kubernetes/catalog/cluster/create) or using the CLI. A lite / free cluster is sufficient for this workshop.

_Note:_ When using the CLI or the Cloud console in a browser, always make sure to **view the correct region**, as your resources will only be visible the region they were created in.

---

### 4.7 Accessing the Kubernetes cluster manually (optional) <a name="part-SETUP-05"></a>

Now let's see how to set the context to work with our clusters by using the ```kubectl``` CLI, how to access the Kubernetes dashboard, and how to gather basic information about our cluster.

We set the context for the cluster in the CLI.
Every time you log in to the IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service CLI to work with the cluster, you must run these commands to set the path to the cluster's configuration file as a session variable.
The Kubernetes CLI uses this variable to find a local configuration file and certificates that are necessary to connect with the cluster in IBM Cloud.


1. Log in to your IBM Cloud account. Include the --sso option if using a federated ID.

    ```sh
        $ ibmcloud login -a https://cloud.ibm.com -r us-south -g default
    ```

    _Note:_ If this statement does not work, please change **d**efault to **D**efault

2. List the available clusters: ```ibmcloud ks clusters```.
This command should now show the cluster which is being created.


3. Download the configuration file and certificates for the cluster using the ```cluster-config``` command:

    ```sh
    $ ibmcloud ks cluster-config <cluster-name>
    ```

4. Copy and paste the **output** from the command in the previous step to set the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable and configure the CLI to run `kubectl` commands against the cluster:

    ```sh
    $ export KUBECONFIG=/<home>/.bluemix/plugins/container-service/clusters/mycluster/kube-config-<region>-<cluster-name>.yml
    ```

5. Get basic information about the cluster and its worker nodes.
This information can help you both manage the cluster and troubleshoot issues.

Get the details of your cluster: `ibmcloud ks cluster-get <cluster-name>`

6. Verify the nodes in the cluster:

    ```sh
    $ ibmcloud ks workers <cluster-name>
    $ kubectl get nodes
    ```

7. View the currently available services, deployments, and pods:

    ```sh
    $ kubectl get svc,deploy,po --all-namespaces
    ```

---

### 4.8 Access the IBM Cloud Container Registry manually (optional) <a name="part-SETUP-06"></a>
[<home>](#home)

In order to build and distribute Container images, we need a Container registry. We can use the **IBM Container Registry** which can be accessed straight from our Kubernetes cluster. Let's log in to the Container Registry service via the `ibmcloud` CLI and obtain the information about our registry:

    ```sh
    $ ibmcloud cr login
    $ ibmcloud cr region-set us-south
    $ ibmcloud cr region
    You are targeting region 'us-south', the registry is 'You are targeting region 'us-south', the registry is 'us.icr.io'.'.
    ```

---

Now we have finished all the **preparation**, let's get started with the [introduction](01-introduction.md).

Commit message:

update W1 and W2 - microprofile 3.0 - feature code - optional registry name

workshop/00-prerequisites.md, after:

[home](README.md)
# Prerequisites

## 1. IBM Cloud Services

We will use the following IBM Cloud Services in this hands-on workshop:

* [IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/containers?topic=containers-getting-started#getting-started) with a custom **Istio** installation
* [IBM Cloud Container Registry Service](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#getting-started)

![cns-basic-setup-01](images/cns-basic-setup-01.png)

## 2. Tools on your laptop

In order to complete the workshop, you will need the following tools installed on your laptop:

- IDE or Editor: [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), for example 
- [git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git) 
- [curl](https://curl.haxx.se/download.html)
- [IBM Cloud CLI](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/home/tools)
  [IBM Cloud CLI releases](https://github.com/IBM-Cloud/ibm-cloud-cli-release/releases)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/v17.12/install/)
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)


### 2.1 Options for Windows

For Windows, you will need access to a Unix shell because you will execute predefined bash scripts and other CLI commands. 

You have different options:

1. [Use a workshop Docker image for Window 10](00-prerequisites-windows-10.md)
    
    We tested this option on a Windows 10 machine and documented it.

2. [Windows Subsystem for Linux Installation Guide for Windows 10](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10)

3. IBM Docker image

    There is a Docker image provided by IBM that contains most of the CLI tools needed
    
    * [Using IBM Cloud Developer Tools from a Docker Container](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cli?topic=cloud-cli-using-idt-from-docker). 
    
    _Note:_ You need to share the downloaded GitHub repo on your Windows filesystem with the running Docker image.

4. Virtual Box

    You can also use [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org) or [Hyper-V](https://docs.microsoft.com/de-de/virtualization/hyper-v-on-windows/about/) to create an [Ubuntu](https://www.osboxes.org/ubuntu/) VM and run the workshop directly in the VM in a Linux environment.

## 3. Verfiy the major prerequisites on your machine

To verfiy the major prerequisites on your machine, you can execute following bash script.

_Note:_ If you use the **workshop Docker image for Windows** described above, you don't need to follow these steps. Everything is in place already.

```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/IBM/cloud-native-starter.git
$ cd cloud-native-starter
$ chmod u+x iks-scripts/*.sh
$ chmod u+x scripts/*.sh
$ ./iks-scripts/check-prerequisites.sh
```

## 4. Setup IBM Cloud Kubernetes cluster<a name="home"></a>

By default, deployment is set in Dallas, USA (us-south). 

1. [Register for IBM Cloud](#part-SETUP-00)
2. [Insert promo code](#part-SETUP-01)
3. [Setup the IBM Cloud CLI](#part-SETUP-02)
4. [Get IBM platform key](#part-SETUP-08)
   4.1 [Customize the IBM Cloud Registry name](#part-SETUP-08-1)
5. [Setup the IBM Cloud Kubernetes CLI](#part-SETUP-03)
6. [Create a IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service and add Istio](#part-SETUP-04)
7. [Access the Kubernetes cluster manually (optional)](#part-SETUP-05)
8. [Access the IBM Cloud Container Registry manually (optional)](#part-SETUP-06)

_Note:_ If you already have a lite cluster in Dallas, some of these scripts will not work, because only **one** lite cluster is allowed per account.

---

### 4.1 Register for IBM Cloud <a name="part-SETUP-00"></a>

1. Open a browser window and navigate to the IBM Cloud [Registration page](https://ibm.biz/Bd2JHx).

![image](images/registration.png)

2. Fill in the registration form and follow the link in the **confirmation email** to confirm your account once it arrives.

![Validation email](images/email.png)

3. [Login into IBM Cloud](https://ibm.biz/Bd2JHx) using your account credentials.

_Note:_ By default, all new IBM Cloud accounts are set to a [lite version](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/pricing).

The lite account provides free access to a subset of IBM Cloud resources. Lite accounts **do not need a credit-card** to sign up and they **do not expire** after a certain period of time. 
In order to create a free Kubernetes cluster, you need a **promo** or **feature code**.

---

### 4.2 Insert feature code <a name="part-SETUP-01"></a>
[<home>](#home)

In order to execute the workshop easily, we provide **promotional codes** to create free Kubernetes clusters, so no credit card details are required.
To apply the promotional code to your [Cloud Account](https://cloud.ibm.com/account), navigate to your "`Account settings`" and then to ("`Manage`" -> "`Account`").
Enter your unique Feature (Promo) Code to upgrade your lite account.

_Note:_ Free clusters expire after one month.

---

### 4.3 Setup the IBM Cloud CLI <a name="part-SETUP-02"></a>
[<home>](#home)

_Note:_ If you use the **workshop Docker image for Windows** described above, you don't need to follow these steps. Everything is in place already.

Follow the steps listed under the [Install from shell](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/cli/reference/bluemix_cli?topic=cloud-cli-install-ibmcloud-cli#shell_install) section to download and install the IBM Cloud CLI.

- MacOS: `curl -fsSL https://clis.ng.bluemix.net/install/osx | sh`
- Linux: `curl -fsSL https://clis.ng.bluemix.net/install/linux | sh`
- Windows (Powershell): `iex(New-Object Net.WebClient).DownloadString('https://clis.ng.bluemix.net/install/powershell')`

[Documentation install CLI](images/docs.gif)

---

### 4.4 Get an IBM platform key <a name="part-SETUP-08"></a>

We will need an IBM platform key to use the bash script automation later. 

1. Log in to IBM Cloud using the **"us-south"** Region. Include the --sso option if using a federated ID.

```sh
$ ibmcloud login -a https://cloud.ibm.com -r us-south -g default
```

_Note:_ If this statement does not work, please change **d**efault to **D**efault

2. Create an IBM platform for your API key and name it (**cloud-native-starter-key**, for example) and provide a filename  (**cloud-native-starter-key.json**, for example).

```sh
$ ibmcloud iam api-key-create cloud-native-starter-key \
  -d "This is the cloud-native-starter key to access the IBM Platform" \
  --file cloud-native-starter-key.json
$ cat cloud-native-starter-key.json
```

Sample **json** output. 
Copy the ```"apikey": "KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx"```from the json output.

```sh
{
	"name": "cloud-native-starter-key",
	"description": "This is the cloud-native-starter key to access the IBM Platform",
	"apikey": "KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx",
	"createdAt": "2019-06-05T06:33+0000",
	"locked": false,
	"uuid": "ApiKey-b96e7355-d1f5-477c-be60-302b20xxxxx"
}
```

_Optional:_ We can verify the key in IBM Cloud, as you can see in the image below:

![ibm-cloud-key](images/ibm-cloud-key.png)


3. Create a copy of the **template.local.env** and paste the file into the same folder. Rename the new file to **local.env**. Then insert the platform key, which we created before, into the **local.env** file as the value for the ```IBMCLOUD_API_KEY``` variable, which we can see in step 4.

_Note:_ If you use the **custom Docker image**, you don't need to follow these steps.

```sh
$ cp template.local.env local.env
$ cat local.env
```

1. Verify the entries in the `local.env` file.

2. Open file **local.env** in a editor.

_Note:_ If you use the **custom Docker image**, open the file with the nano editor. ```nano local.env```

We see the file has preset values for regions, cluster name, and image registry namespace in local.env. You can adjust them to your needs.

3. Insert the copied ```"apikey":"KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx"```from the json output to ```IBMCLOUD_API_KEY=KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx``` and save the file.

### 4.4.1 Customize the IBM Cloud Registry name <a name="part-SETUP-08-1"></a>

1. Edit the `local.env` file.

2. Change the ```REGISTRY_NAMESPACE=cloud-native``` to ```cloud-native-yourname```

_Note:_ `yourname` must be maximum 5 charters. Changing the name is necessary, because namespaces are required to be **unique** across the entire **region** that the **specific registry** is located in, not just ***unique to your account**. This is mentioned in the following [public documentation](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#gs_registry_namespace_add).

**Example** local.env:

```sh
IBMCLOUD_API_KEY=KMAdgh4Aw-vhWcqcCsljX26O0dyScfKBaILgxxxxx
IBM_CLOUD_REGION=us-south
CLUSTER_NAME=cloud-native
REGISTRY_NAMESPACE=cloud-native-yourname
IBM_CLOUD_CF_API=https://api.ng.bluemix.net
IBM_CLOUD_CF_ORG=
IBM_CLOUD_CF_SPACE=dev
AUTHORS_DB=local
CLOUDANT_URL=

```
---

### 4.5 Setup the IBM Cloud Kubernetes CLI <a name="part-SETUP-03"></a>
[<home>](#home)

_Note:_ If you use the **workshop Docker image for Windows** described above, you don't need to follow these steps. Everything is in place already.

Let's log in to the IBM Cloud CLI tool: `ibmcloud login`.
If you are an IBMer, include the `--sso` flag: `ibmcloud login --sso`.

1. Install the IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service plug-ins:

```sh
$ ibmcloud plugin install container-service
$ ibmcloud plugin install container-registry
```

To verify that the plug-in is installed properly, run `ibmcloud plugin list`.
The Container Service plug-in is displayed in the results as `container-service/kubernetes-service`.

2. Initialize the Container Service plug-in and point the endpoint to your region with the `ks` sub command:

```sh
$ ibmcloud ks region-set us-south
```

Note: all subsequent CLI commands will operate in that region.

---

### 4.6 Create a IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service and add ISTIO<a name="part-SETUP-04"></a>
[<home>](#home)

For the following steps we use bash scripts from the github project.

---

#### 4.6.1 Automated creation of a Cluster with Istio for the workshop

* **create cluster**

1. Use the following bash script to create a free Kubernetes Cluster on IBM Cloud:

```sh
$ ./iks-scripts/create-iks-cluster.sh
```

_Note:_ Creating a cluster can take up to **20 minutes**.
You can verify the cluster in the IBM Cloud, as we see in the image below:

![ibm-cloud-cluster](images/ibm-cloud-cluster.png)

* **Adding Istio**

The IBM Kubernetes Service has an option to install a managed Istio mesh into a Kubernetes cluster. Unfortunately, the Lite Kubernetes Cluster we created in the previous step does not meet the hardware requirements for a managed Istio. Hence, we manually install an Istio demo or evaluation version.

These are the instructions to install Istio. For this workshop we are using **Istio 1.1.5**.

_Note:_ Ensure you are logged on to IBM Cloud in your terminal session.
        ```sh
        $ ibmcloud login -a https://cloud.ibm.com -r us-south -g default
        ```
        _Note:_ If this statement does not work, please change **d**efault to **D**efault

1. First, let's check if the cluster is available:

    ```sh
    $ ./iks-scripts/cluster-get-config.sh
    ```
    If the cluster isn't ready, the script will tell you. Just wait a few more minutes and then try again.

    _Note:_ You **must** run this command to check that the cluster completed provisioning, it **must** report that the cluster is **ready for Istio installation**! This command also retrieves the cluster configuration, which is needed in other scripts. This configuration can only be retrieved from clusters in a ready state.

2. List the available clusters: ```ibmcloud ks clusters```. This command should now show the cluster which is being created.


3. Download the configuration file and certificates for the cluster using the ```cluster-config``` command:

    ```sh
    $ ibmcloud ks cluster-config <cluster-name>
    ```

4. Copy and paste the **output** from the command in the previous step to set the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable and configure the CLI to run `kubectl` commands against the cluster:

    ```sh
    $ export KUBECONFIG=/<home>/.bluemix/plugins/container-service/clusters/mycluster/kube-config-<region>-<cluster-name>.yml
    ```


5. Download Istio 1.1.5 directly from github into the **workshop** directory:

    ```sh
    cd workshop
    curl -L https://git.io/getLatestIstio | ISTIO_VERSION=1.1.5 sh -
    ```

    _Note:_ Please be aware that this does **not** work on Windows.
    Windows users can download [istio-1.1.5-win.zip](https://github.com/istio/istio/releases/tag/1.1.5) here.
    Unpack the ZIP file into the workshop directory and add the path to ```istio-1.1.5/bin``` your Windows **PATH**.

6. Add `istioctl` to the PATH environment variable, e.g copy and paste in your shell and/or `~/.profile`:

    ```sh
    export PATH=$PWD/istio-1.1.5/bin:$PATH
    ```

7. Navigate to the extracted directory: 

    ```sh
    cd istio-1.1.5
    ```

8. Install Istio:

    ```sh
    $ for i in install/kubernetes/helm/istio-init/files/crd*yaml; do kubectl apply -f $i; done
    ```
    
    a. Wait a few seconds before issuing the next command:

    ```sh
    $ kubectl apply -f install/kubernetes/istio-demo.yaml
    ```

    b. Check that all pods are **running** or **completed** before continuing.

    ```sh
    $ kubectl get pod -n istio-system
    ```

    c. Enable automatic sidecar injection:

    ```sh
    $ kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled
    ```

    d. Once completed, the Kiali dashboard can be accessed with this command:

    ```sh
    $ kubectl -n istio-system port-forward $(kubectl -n istio-system get pod -l app=kiali -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}') 20001:20001
    ```
    e. Then open http://localhost:20001/kiali in your browser, log in with the following credentials Username: admin, Password: admin

    ![Kiali installation](images/istio-installation-02.png)

    In the following image we can see Istio installed on the Kubernetes cluster. We also notice the **Istio Ingress gateway** and the **Istio-System** namespace, which we will use later.
    
    ![Istio installation](images/istio-installation-01.png)

Customize the IBM Cloud Registry Configure

1. Ensure you are are in the project directory and then execute the script.

```sh
$ cd ../..
$ pwd
$ ./iks-scripts/create-registry.sh
```

Sample output:

```sh
2019-06-05 09:06:40 Creating a Namespace in IBM Cloud Container Registry
2019-06-05 09:06:40 Logging into IBM Cloud
2019-06-05 09:06:48 Creating Namespace cloud-native
2019-06-05 09:07:03 Namespace in IBM Cloud Container Registry created
```

If you get to following output in the ```./iks-scripts/create-registry.log``` logfile ```The requested namespace is already in use```.

```sh
OK
Adding namespace 'cloud-native'...

FAILED
The requested namespace is already in use in registry 'us.icr.io'.
Choose a different namespace.
```

Namespaces are required to be unique across the entire region that the specific registry is located in, not just unique on each account. This is mentioned in the following [public documentation](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#gs_registry_namespace_add). 

_Optional:_ Change the registry name in the ```local.env``` file, for example to ```REGISTRY_NAMESPACE=cloud-native-YOUR_NAME```. The `REGISTRY_NAMESPACE` will be change by a bash script later.

```sh
IBM_CLOUD_REGION=us-south
IBM_CLOUD_CLUSTER_REGION=us-south
CLUSTER_NAME=cloud-native
REGISTRY_NAMESPACE=cloud-native-YOUR_NAME
```

_Optional:_ You can find the created namespace here (https://cloud.ibm.com/kubernetes/registry/main/start):

![ibm-cloud-registry](images/ibm-cloud-registry.png)

---

#### 4.6.2  Manual creation of a Cluster (optional)

You can create an IBM Cloud Kubernetes cluster (lite ) using the [IBM Cloud console](https://cloud.ibm.com/containers-kubernetes/catalog/cluster/create) or using the CLI. A lite / free cluster is sufficient for this workshop.

_Note:_ When using the CLI or the Cloud console in a browser, always make sure to **view the correct region**, as your resources will only be visible the region they were created in.

---

### 4.7 Accessing the Kubernetes cluster manually (optional) <a name="part-SETUP-05"></a>

Now let's see how to set the context to work with our clusters by using the ```kubectl``` CLI, how to access the Kubernetes dashboard, and how to gather basic information about our cluster.

We set the context for the cluster in the CLI.
Every time you log in to the IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service CLI to work with the cluster, you must run these commands to set the path to the cluster's configuration file as a session variable.
The Kubernetes CLI uses this variable to find a local configuration file and certificates that are necessary to connect with the cluster in IBM Cloud.


1. Log in to your IBM Cloud account. Include the --sso option if using a federated ID.

    ```sh
        $ ibmcloud login -a https://cloud.ibm.com -r us-south -g default
    ```

    _Note:_ If this statement does not work, please change **d**efault to **D**efault

2. List the available clusters: ```ibmcloud ks clusters```.
This command should now show the cluster which is being created.


3. Download the configuration file and certificates for the cluster using the ```cluster-config``` command:

    ```sh
    $ ibmcloud ks cluster-config <cluster-name>
    ```

4. Copy and paste the **output** from the command in the previous step to set the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable and configure the CLI to run `kubectl` commands against the cluster:

    ```sh
    $ export KUBECONFIG=/<home>/.bluemix/plugins/container-service/clusters/mycluster/kube-config-<region>-<cluster-name>.yml
    ```

5. Get basic information about the cluster and its worker nodes.
This information can help you both manage the cluster and troubleshoot issues.

Get the details of your cluster: `ibmcloud ks cluster-get <cluster-name>`

6. Verify the nodes in the cluster:

    ```sh
    $ ibmcloud ks workers <cluster-name>
    $ kubectl get nodes
    ```

7. View the currently available services, deployments, and pods:

    ```sh
    $ kubectl get svc,deploy,po --all-namespaces
    ```

---

### 4.8 Access the IBM Cloud Container Registry manually (optional) <a name="part-SETUP-06"></a>
[<home>](#home)

In order to build and distribute Container images, we need a Container registry. We can use the **IBM Container Registry** which can be accessed straight from our Kubernetes cluster. Let's log in to the Container Registry service via the `ibmcloud` CLI and obtain the information about our registry:

    ```sh
    $ ibmcloud cr login
    $ ibmcloud cr region-set us-south
    $ ibmcloud cr region
    You are targeting region 'us-south', the registry is 'You are targeting region 'us-south', the registry is 'us.icr.io'.'.
    ```

---

Now we have finished all the **preparation**, let's get started with the [introduction](01-introduction.md).
