workshop-one-service/0-create-kubernetes-cluster.md, before:

# Table of Content

1. [Register for IBM Cloud](#part-SETUP-00)
2. [Insert promo code](#part-SETUP-01)
3. [Create a free Kubernetes cluster](#part-SETUP-02)
4. [Configure the IBM Cloud Container Registry](#part-SETUP-03)

# 1. Register for IBM Cloud <a name="part-SETUP-00"></a>

#### Step 1: Open a browser window and navigate to the IBM Cloud [Registration page](https://ibm.biz/Bd2JHx).

![image](images/registration.png)

#### Step 2: Fill in the registration form and follow the link in the **confirmation email** to confirm your account once it arrives.

![Validation email](images/email.png)

#### Step 3: [Login into IBM Cloud](https://ibm.biz/Bd2JHx) using your account credentials.

_Note:_ By default, all new IBM Cloud accounts are set to a [lite version](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/pricing).

The lite account provides free access to a subset of IBM Cloud resources. Lite accounts **don't need a credit-card** to sign up and they **don't expire** after a certain period of time. 
In order to create a free Kubernetes cluster, you need a **promo** or **feature code**.

---

# 2 Insert promo/feature code <a name="part-SETUP-01"></a>

In order to execute the workshop easily, we provide **feature codes** to create free Kubernetes clusters, so no credit card details are required.
To apply the feature code to your [Cloud Account](https://cloud.ibm.com/account), navigate to your "`Account settings`" and then to ("`Manage`" -> "`Account`").
Enter your unique Feature (Promo) Code to upgrade your lite account.

_Note:_ Free clusters expire after one month.

---

# 3 Create a free Kubernetes Cluster <a name="part-SETUP-02"></a>

#### Step 1: Logon to IBM Cloud

#### Step 2: Select in the menu "Catalog" and search for "Kubernetes Cluster"

![Kubernetes service](images/ibmcloud-catalog.png)

#### Step 3: Click on "Kubernetes Cluster"

#### Step 4: Press "Create"

![create Kubernetes service](images/ibmcloud-create-kubernetes-1.png)

#### Step 5: Click on the Kubernetes Services and select "Free"

Ensure you set following values in the creation dialog:

* Cluster name:     cloud-native
* Resource group:   Default
* Geography:        North America
* Metro:            Dallas

_Note:_ In the new IBM Cloud UI it seems the enties for Geography and Metro are no longer available.

![create Kubernetes service](images/ibmcloud-create-kubernetes-2.png)

#### Step 6: Press "Create custer"

#### Step 7: Now you will be forwarded to your cluster on IBM Cloud and you can verify the status of the creation of your cluster

The creation of the custer takes up to 20 min.

![create Kubernetes service](images/ibmcloud-create-kubernetes-3.png)

# 3 Configure the IBM Cloud Container Registry <a name="part-SETUP-03"></a>

1. Select in **Kubernetes** the entry **Registry** and ensure your are in the **Dallas location**.

![Select in Kubernetes the entry Registry](images/ibmcloud-configure-container-registry-1.png)

2. The create a namespace with a unique name cloud-native-[YOURNAME]

![The create a namespace with a unique name cloud-native](images/ibmcloud-configure-container-registry-2.png)

_Note:_ Namespaces are required to be **unique** across the entire **region** that the **specific registry** is located in, not just ***unique to your account**. This is mentioned in the following [public documentation](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#gs_registry_namespace_add).

3. Verify the namespace was created

![Verify the namespace was created](images/ibmcloud-configure-container-registry-3.png)

---

Now we have created a free IBM Kubernetes Cluster and we configured the IBM Cloud Container Registry.

__Continue with [the tools prerequisites](./1-prereqs.md#tools)__

Commit message:

update W2 L1,L0 - IBM Cloud Container registry namespace creation

workshop-one-service/0-create-kubernetes-cluster.md, after:

# Table of Content

1. [Register for IBM Cloud](#part-SETUP-00)
2. [Insert promo code](#part-SETUP-01)
3. [Create a free Kubernetes cluster](#part-SETUP-02)
4. [Configure the IBM Cloud Container Registry](#part-SETUP-03)

# 1. Register for IBM Cloud <a name="part-SETUP-00"></a>

#### Step 1: Open a browser window and navigate to the IBM Cloud [Registration page](https://ibm.biz/Bd2JHx).

![image](images/registration.png)

#### Step 2: Fill in the registration form and follow the link in the **confirmation email** to confirm your account once it arrives.

![Validation email](images/email.png)

#### Step 3: [Login into IBM Cloud](https://ibm.biz/Bd2JHx) using your account credentials.

_Note:_ By default, all new IBM Cloud accounts are set to a [lite version](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/pricing).

The lite account provides free access to a subset of IBM Cloud resources. Lite accounts **don't need a credit-card** to sign up and they **don't expire** after a certain period of time. 
In order to create a free Kubernetes cluster, you need a **promo** or **feature code**.

---

# 2 Insert promo/feature code <a name="part-SETUP-01"></a>

In order to execute the workshop easily, we provide **feature codes** to create free Kubernetes clusters, so no credit card details are required.
To apply the feature code to your [Cloud Account](https://cloud.ibm.com/account), navigate to your "`Account settings`" and then to ("`Manage`" -> "`Account`").
Enter your unique Feature (Promo) Code to upgrade your lite account.

_Note:_ Free clusters expire after one month.

---

# 3 Create a free Kubernetes Cluster <a name="part-SETUP-02"></a>

#### Step 1: Logon to IBM Cloud

#### Step 2: Select in the menu "Catalog" and search for "Kubernetes Cluster"

![Kubernetes service](images/ibmcloud-catalog.png)

#### Step 3: Click on "Kubernetes Cluster"

#### Step 4: Press "Create"

![create Kubernetes service](images/ibmcloud-create-kubernetes-1.png)

#### Step 5: Click on the Kubernetes Services and select "Free"

Ensure you set following values in the creation dialog:

* Cluster name:     cloud-native
* Resource group:   Default
* Geography:        North America
* Metro:            Dallas

_Note:_ In the new IBM Cloud UI it seems the enties for Geography and Metro are no longer available.

![create Kubernetes service](images/ibmcloud-create-kubernetes-2.png)

#### Step 6: Press "Create custer"

#### Step 7: Now you will be forwarded to your cluster on IBM Cloud and you can verify the status of the creation of your cluster

The creation of the custer takes up to 20 min.

![create Kubernetes service](images/ibmcloud-create-kubernetes-3.png)

# 3 Configure the IBM Cloud Container Registry <a name="part-SETUP-03"></a>

1. Select in **Kubernetes** the entry **Registry** and ensure your are in the **Dallas location**.

![Select in Kubernetes the entry Registry](images/ibmcloud-configure-container-registry-1.png)

2. The create a namespace with a unique name cloud-native-[YOURNAME]

![The create a namespace with a unique name cloud-native](images/ibmcloud-configure-container-registry-2.png)

_Note:_ Namespaces are required to be **unique** across the entire **region** that the **specific registry** is located in, not just ***unique to your account**. This is mentioned in the following [public documentation](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#gs_registry_namespace_add).

3. Verify the namespace was created

![Verify the namespace was created](images/ibmcloud-configure-container-registry-3.png)


_Note:_ We notice that the button **create namespace** currently not available in the IBM Cloud UI, if you have not a existing IBM Cloud Container registry namespace in place. You must create your first **IBM Cloud Container registry namespace** with the IBM Cloud CLI and follow the steps in the **quick guide** you can see below in the image.

![quick guide](images/create-registry-namespace.png)

If you have not installed the IBM Cloud CLI tools on you machine, you can use the provided Docker image:

```sh
$ docker run -ti tsuedbroecker/cns-workshop-tools:v1
```
---

Now we have created a free IBM Kubernetes Cluster and we configured the IBM Cloud Container Registry.

__Continue with [the tools prerequisites](./1-prereqs.md#tools)__
