workshop-one-service/1-prereqs.md, before:

# Lab 1 - Install Prerequisites

## Access to the IBM Cloud

An [IBM Cloud account](https://cloud.ibm.com/registration) is needed. 

In order to run this workshop you have two options and in both options you will **create no cost**, when you follow the written instructions and you use the free Kubernetes Cluster.

1. You need a promo/feature code for a IBM Cloud **Trial** account. You will get such promo/feature code when you attend that hands-on workshop.

2. You create a IBM Lite Account and upgrade your account to a **Pay-As-You-Go** account by using your credit card. ([Account Types](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/account?topic=account-accounts))

We will use the following IBM Cloud Services in this hands-on workshop:

* [IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/containers?topic=containers-getting-started#getting-started)
* [IBM Cloud Container Registry Service](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#getting-started)

![cns-basic-setup-01](images/cns-basic-setup-01.png)

Follow the [instructions](0-create-kubernetes-cluster.md) to set up a free Kubernetes cluster and configure the IBM Cloud Container Registry.

## Tools

In order to complete the workshop, you need to install [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/install/). Docker Desktop is available for Mac and Windows and the Docker Engine can be run natively on Linux.

**The tools options are only relevant from lab 4. All other labs do only need Docker and a terminal session on your local machine.**

Several other tools are needed. There are different options to install these tools.

Based on our experience the option 2 is the best choice for Windows users. For more background, why we provide these different options, see this [article](https://suedbroecker.net/2019/08/27/definition-of-a-dockerfile-to-use-bash-scripts-on-a-windows-10-machine-for-our-cloud-native-starter-workshop/).

---

### Tools - Option 1 (prefered for Mac or Linux): Prebuilt Image with local Code

There is an image on DockerHub with all required tools. In order to use local IDEs and editors to modify code and configuraton files a Docker volume is used. This option  works only for Mac and Linux.

#### Step 1: Run these commands in a terminal

```
$ git clone https://github.com/IBM/cloud-native-starter
$ cd cloud-native-starter
$ ROOT_FOLDER=$(pwd)
$ docker run -v $ROOT_FOLDER/:/cloud-native-starter -it --rm tsuedbroecker/cns-workshop-tools:v1
```
_Note:_ With the `--rm` option in the docker run command the container is deleted once you exit. This is intended.

#### Step 2: Inside your running Docker image you can access your the local github project 

```
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# cd /cloud-native-starter/
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# ls
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# ROOT_FOLDER=$(pwd)
```

#### Step 3: Verfiy the tool prerequisites on for the workshop

```
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# chmod u+x iks-scripts/*.sh
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# chmod u+x scripts/*.sh
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# ./iks-scripts/check-prerequisites.sh
```

#### Step 4: Move on with [Verify Access your free Kubernetes Cluster on the IBM Cloud](./1-prereqs.md#verify-access-to-kubernetes-on-the-ibm-cloud)


### Tools - Option 2 (prefered for Windows): Prebuilt Image with Code in Container

There is an image on DockerHub with all required tools. This option works for Mac, Linux and Windows. To get started as quickly as possible, use this image (see this [article](https://suedbroecker.net/2019/08/27/definition-of-a-dockerfile-to-use-bash-scripts-on-a-windows-10-machine-for-our-cloud-native-starter-workshop/) for more).

#### Step 1: Run this command in a terminal

```
$ docker run -ti tsuedbroecker/cns-workshop-tools:v1
```
_Note:_ If you using Windows you also need to download or clone the project to your local workstation for the upcoming Docker and Java lab, because you can't use Docker in the 'cns-workshop-tools' Docker image.

#### Step 2: After the container has been started, run these commands inside your running Docker image to get the lastest version of the workshop:

```
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# cd /
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# git clone https://github.com/IBM/cloud-native-starter.git
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# cd cloud-native-starter
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# ROOT_FOLDER=$(pwd)
```

#### Step 3: Verfiy the tool prerequisites on for the workshop

```
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# chmod u+x iks-scripts/*.sh
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# chmod u+x scripts/*.sh
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# ./iks-scripts/check-prerequisites.sh
```

#### Step 4: Move on with [Verify Access to Kubernetes on the IBM Cloud](./1-prereqs.md#verify-access-to-kubernetes-on-the-ibm-cloud)


### Tools - Option 3 (prefered for developers with Mac or Linux): Install Tools on your Notebook

This approach works only for Mac and Linux (see this [article](https://suedbroecker.net/2019/08/27/definition-of-a-dockerfile-to-use-bash-scripts-on-a-windows-10-machine-for-our-cloud-native-starter-workshop/) for more).
Here you install all tool on you machine. This is the most time-consuming option, if you have to install all the tools.

#### Step 1: Install the following tools:

- IDE or Editor: [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), for example 
- [git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git) 
- [curl](https://curl.haxx.se/download.html)
- [IBM Cloud CLI](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/home/tools)
  [IBM Cloud CLI releases](https://github.com/IBM-Cloud/ibm-cloud-cli-release/releases)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/v17.12/install/)
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)


#### Step 2: Get the code:

```
$ git clone git clone https://github.com/IBM/cloud-native-starter
$ cd cloud-native-starter
$ ROOT_FOLDER=$(pwd)
```

#### Step 3: Verify the tool prerequisites on for the workshop

```
$ chmod u+x iks-scripts/*.sh
$ chmod u+x scripts/*.sh
$ ./iks-scripts/check-prerequisites.sh
```

#### Step 3: Move on with [Verify Access to Kubernetes on the IBM Cloud](./1-prereqs.md#verify-access-to-kubernetes-on-the-ibm-cloud)

---

## Verify Access to Kubernetes on the IBM Cloud

#### Step 1: After you've created a new free Kubernetes cluster

1. Logon to the IBM Cloud web console

2. Select **Kubernetes** in the menu

![Select Kubernetes in the menu](images/verify-cluster-access-1.png)

3. Chose **Clusters** and click on your **Kubernetes cluster**

![Chose Clusters and click on your Kubernetes cluster](images/verify-cluster-access-2.png)

4. Select the tab **Access**

![Select the tab Access](images/verify-cluster-access-3.png)

5. Follow the steps in the **Access** tab, by starting from **After your cluster provision ..** and inserting the commands into your terminal session.

![Follow the steps in the Access tab, by starting from "After your cluster provision" and inserting the commands into your terminal session.](images/verify-cluster-access-4.png)

---

:star: __Continue with [Lab 2 - Running the Java Microservice locally](./2-docker.md#lab-2---running-the-java-microservice-locally)__

Commit message:

update W2 L1,L0 - IBM Cloud Container registry namespace creation

workshop-one-service/1-prereqs.md, after:

# Lab 1 - Install Prerequisites

## Access to the IBM Cloud

An [IBM Cloud account](https://cloud.ibm.com/registration) is needed. 

In order to run this workshop you have two options and in both options you will **create no cost**, when you follow the written instructions and you use the free Kubernetes Cluster.

1. You need a promo/feature code for a IBM Cloud **Trial** account. You will get such promo/feature code when you attend that hands-on workshop.

2. You create a IBM Lite Account and upgrade your account to a **Pay-As-You-Go** account by using your credit card. ([Account Types](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/account?topic=account-accounts))

We will use the following IBM Cloud Services in this hands-on workshop:

* [IBM Cloud Kubernetes Service](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/containers?topic=containers-getting-started#getting-started)
* [IBM Cloud Container Registry Service](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/services/Registry?topic=registry-getting-started#getting-started)

![cns-basic-setup-01](images/cns-basic-setup-01.png)

Follow the [instructions](0-create-kubernetes-cluster.md) to set up a free Kubernetes cluster and configure the IBM Cloud Container Registry.

## Tools

We created a Docker image you will use, that Docker image contains all needed CLIs such as:

- [git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git) 
- [curl](https://curl.haxx.se/download.html)
- [IBM Cloud CLI](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/home/tools)
  [IBM Cloud CLI releases](https://github.com/IBM-Cloud/ibm-cloud-cli-release/releases)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/v17.12/install/)
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)

So, in order to complete the workshop, you only need to install [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/install/). Docker Desktop is available for Mac and Windows and the Docker Engine can be run natively on Linux.

**The following tools options are only relevant from lab 4. All other labs do only need Docker and a terminal session on your local machine.**

There are different options to install or use these tools.

Based on our experience the option 2 is the best choice for Windows users. For more background, why we provide these different options, see this [article](https://suedbroecker.net/2019/08/27/definition-of-a-dockerfile-to-use-bash-scripts-on-a-windows-10-machine-for-our-cloud-native-starter-workshop/).

---

### Tools - Option 1 (prefered for Mac or Linux): Prebuilt Image with local Code

There is an image on DockerHub with all required tools. In order to use local IDEs and editors to modify code and configuraton files a Docker volume is used. This option  works only for Mac and Linux.

#### Step 1: Run these commands in a terminal

```
$ git clone https://github.com/IBM/cloud-native-starter
$ cd cloud-native-starter
$ ROOT_FOLDER=$(pwd)
$ docker run -v $ROOT_FOLDER/:/cloud-native-starter -it --rm tsuedbroecker/cns-workshop-tools:v1
```
_Note:_ With the `--rm` option in the docker run command the container is deleted once you exit. This is intended.

#### Step 2: Inside your running Docker image you can access your the local github project 

```
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# cd /cloud-native-starter/
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# ls
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# ROOT_FOLDER=$(pwd)
```

#### Step 3: Verfiy the tool prerequisites on for the workshop

```
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# chmod u+x iks-scripts/*.sh
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# chmod u+x scripts/*.sh
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# ./iks-scripts/check-prerequisites.sh
```

#### Step 4: Move on with [Verify Access your free Kubernetes Cluster on the IBM Cloud](./1-prereqs.md#verify-access-to-kubernetes-on-the-ibm-cloud)


### Tools - Option 2 (prefered for Windows): Prebuilt Image with Code in Container

There is an image on DockerHub with all required tools. This option works for Mac, Linux and Windows. To get started as quickly as possible, use this image (see this [article](https://suedbroecker.net/2019/08/27/definition-of-a-dockerfile-to-use-bash-scripts-on-a-windows-10-machine-for-our-cloud-native-starter-workshop/) for more).

#### Step 1: Run this command in a terminal

```sh
$ docker run -ti tsuedbroecker/cns-workshop-tools:v1
```
_Note:_ If you using Windows you also need to download or clone the project to your local workstation for the upcoming Docker and Java lab, because you can't use Docker in the 'cns-workshop-tools' Docker image.

#### Step 2: After the container has been started, run these commands inside your running Docker image to get the lastest version of the workshop:

```
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# cd /
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# git clone https://github.com/IBM/cloud-native-starter.git
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# cd cloud-native-starter
root@3f46c41f7303:/usr/local/bin# ROOT_FOLDER=$(pwd)
```

#### Step 3: Verfiy the tool prerequisites on for the workshop

```
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# chmod u+x iks-scripts/*.sh
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# chmod u+x scripts/*.sh
root@3f46c41f7303:/cloud-native-starter# ./iks-scripts/check-prerequisites.sh
```

#### Step 4: Move on with [Verify Access to Kubernetes on the IBM Cloud](./1-prereqs.md#verify-access-to-kubernetes-on-the-ibm-cloud)


### Tools - Option 3 (prefered for developers with Mac or Linux): Install Tools on your Notebook

This approach works only for Mac and Linux (see this [article](https://suedbroecker.net/2019/08/27/definition-of-a-dockerfile-to-use-bash-scripts-on-a-windows-10-machine-for-our-cloud-native-starter-workshop/) for more).
Here you install all tool on you machine. This is the most time-consuming option, if you have to install all the tools.

#### Step 1: Install the following tools:

- IDE or Editor: [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), for example 
- [git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git) 
- [curl](https://curl.haxx.se/download.html)
- [IBM Cloud CLI](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/home/tools)
  [IBM Cloud CLI releases](https://github.com/IBM-Cloud/ibm-cloud-cli-release/releases)
- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/v17.12/install/)
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)


#### Step 2: Get the code:

```
$ git clone git clone https://github.com/IBM/cloud-native-starter
$ cd cloud-native-starter
$ ROOT_FOLDER=$(pwd)
```

#### Step 3: Verify the tool prerequisites on for the workshop

```
$ chmod u+x iks-scripts/*.sh
$ chmod u+x scripts/*.sh
$ ./iks-scripts/check-prerequisites.sh
```

#### Step 3: Move on with [Verify Access to Kubernetes on the IBM Cloud](./1-prereqs.md#verify-access-to-kubernetes-on-the-ibm-cloud)

---

## Verify Access to Kubernetes on the IBM Cloud

#### Step 1: After you've created a new free Kubernetes cluster

1. Logon to the IBM Cloud web console

2. Select **Kubernetes** in the menu

![Select Kubernetes in the menu](images/verify-cluster-access-1.png)

3. Chose **Clusters** and click on your **Kubernetes cluster**

![Chose Clusters and click on your Kubernetes cluster](images/verify-cluster-access-2.png)

4. Select the tab **Access**

![Select the tab Access](images/verify-cluster-access-3.png)

5. Follow the steps in the **Access** tab, by starting from **After your cluster provision ..** and inserting the commands into your terminal session.

![Follow the steps in the Access tab, by starting from "After your cluster provision" and inserting the commands into your terminal session.](images/verify-cluster-access-4.png)

---

:star: __Continue with [Lab 2 - Running the Java Microservice locally](./2-docker.md#lab-2---running-the-java-microservice-locally)__
