workshop-one-service/README.md, before:

# Deploying Java Microservices to Kubernetes on IBM Cloud

This workshop demonstrates how to build a microservice with Java and how to deploy it to Kubernetes on the IBM Cloud.

There are small variations of definition for microservices out there, here is the definition of [Gartner](https://www.gartner.com/en/information-technology/glossary/microservice):

> A microservice is a service-oriented application component that is tightly scoped, strongly encapsulated, loosely coupled, independently deployable and independently scalable.

[Here is additional information to microservice, provided by IBM.](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/microservices)

The microservice is kept as simple as possible, so that it can be used as a starting point for other microservices. The microservice has been developed with Java EE and [Eclipse MicroProfile](https://microprofile.io/).

_Note:_ Useful YouTube playlist [Build and deploy a microservice to Kubernetes](https://ibm.biz/BdzVRY)


## Labs

This workshop has four labs. It should take between 60 and 90 minutues to complete the workshop.

1. Installing prerequisites: [lab](1-prereqs.md)
2. Running the Java microservice locally: [lab](2-docker.md) 
3. Understanding the Java implementation: [lab](3-java.md)
4. Deploying to Kubernetes: [lab](4-kubernetes.md)

The first lab describes how to install all required prerequisites. In the easiest case this is only Docker Desktop and an image with all other tools.

Lab 2 and 3 describe how to develop a microservice with Java EE and Eclipse MicroProfile.

The last labs ways to deploy applications to Kubernetes on IBM Cloud.

Commit message:

update w1 add like to the toolchain project

workshop-one-service/README.md, after:

# Deploying Java Microservices to Kubernetes on IBM Cloud

This workshop demonstrates how to build a microservice with Java and how to deploy it to Kubernetes on the IBM Cloud.

There are small variations of definition for microservices out there, here is the definition of [Gartner](https://www.gartner.com/en/information-technology/glossary/microservice):

> A microservice is a service-oriented application component that is tightly scoped, strongly encapsulated, loosely coupled, independently deployable and independently scalable.

[Here is additional information to microservice, provided by IBM.](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/microservices)

The microservice is kept as simple as possible, so that it can be used as a starting point for other microservices. The microservice has been developed with Java EE and [Eclipse MicroProfile](https://microprofile.io/).

_Note:_ Useful YouTube playlist [Build and deploy a microservice to Kubernetes](https://ibm.biz/BdzVRY)


## Labs

This workshop has four labs. It should take between 60 and 90 minutues to complete the workshop.

1. Installing prerequisites: [lab](1-prereqs.md)
2. Running the Java microservice locally: [lab](2-docker.md) 
3. Understanding the Java implementation: [lab](3-java.md)
4. Deploying to Kubernetes: [lab](4-kubernetes.md)

> Lab 2 and 3 describe how to develop a microservice with Java EE and Eclipse MicroProfile. I you aren't a developer you can skip these two labs.

The last lab shows one way to deploy a microservice to Kubernetes to IBM Cloud.

_Note:_ If you want to deploy the authors microservice to IBM Cloud without touching any code or commandline, you can use these instructions [Use a IBM Cloud toolchain to deploy a Java Microservices to Kubernetes on IBM Cloud](https://thomassuedbroecker.github.io/cloud-native-starter-one-service-workshop-toolchain/) which do automate lab 4.
